This is an interview with Dr. Thomas J. Kozik,
professor of mechanical engineering. Today's
date is October 1, 1981. Let's begin, Dr. Kozik, by
your telling us something about your early years,
where you were born, when, and so forth. I was born
in Jersey City, New Jersey, on April the 9th, 1930.
The section of Jersey City was the downtown
section, which was the landing spot for most of the
immigrants who came from Europe. My mother and my
father both came from Poland. In the early years,
downtown Jersey City was broken up into three
ethnic areas. There was the Polish area, there was
the Italian area, and then there was the Irish
area. But in reality, the Irish area wasn't a
single identifiable area because the Irish
happened to rule the city. These were the days of
Mayor Haig and the political machine. The Poles
and the Italians provided most of the physical
labor force for Jersey City. That labor force
typically was employed on the docks, was employed
in the, not stock markets, but slaughterhouses,
and was employed in the various warehouses. This
was backbreaking type of work. I didn't speak
English until I was age six because there was no
need to in my section. People in the various ethnic
areas spoke the language and maintained the
culture of their home country.
Upon going to parochial school, I learned and
began to speak English, graduated from parochial
school, and then went to Ferris High School, which
was the public high school at the RRIS. This was the
public high school for the downtown residents.
Having graduated from Ferris, I was very
fortunate to be accepted to Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. That was rather unique
because no one from the downtown area. That's up in
Troy, New York. Let me ask you about your parents.
What did your father do for a living? came to this
country in about 1904-1905
as a young man from what is now Poland, but in those
days was simply a part of the territory of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire. He was, I believe, 16,
he tells me, and his prime reason for leaving
Poland was he was about to be drafted into the
Austrian army. And many immigrants in those days
wanted nothing to do with the service, and so he
fled from Poland and went to, I believe, Hamburg
and saved and got enough money together to come to
this country on steerage. My father always told me
that he literally hid behind a woman's skirt
because he mentioned that in crossing the border,
there were passport checks. And the Austrian
government was very concerned about keeping
people in, especially people of military age. So,
as he was crossing the border from what was then the
Polish territory into the German territory, the
inspector came along the train, and a group of
peasant women with their long flowing skirts were
sitting on a bench, and they knew what the
situation was, and my father looked panicky, and
they told him quick to get onto the bench, which he
did, and then they spread their skirts over him,
and the inspector never saw them. Years later,
when I was drafted into the army, my father told me
that he thought I was the failure in the family. I
wasn't able to escape the draft. At any rate, he
came to this country. Well, he came across on
steerage, and he told something about the trips
and the steerage trip itself. Basically, it was a
hole in which all of the immigrants were put in.
Probably by our present standards, we would have
considered it being unsanitary and a crowded
situation. But for those days, it was simply
normal, and the people were just delighted to be
leaving their countries, not only from Poland,
but from most of the Eastern European countries.
Food was served in a large pot. You had a community
dish, community label. My father still tells me
that there were the two Russians, somewhere from
deep inside of Russia. And he said they were
pleasant men, but obviously untutored and
uncultured. The choice piece of food This stew
that they would invariably bring was the meat with
the fat on it. And when they would bring the pot
over, one of these Russians would walk over, roll
up his sleeve, and just shove his hand into this hot
boiling mess just to get out this slimy piece of fat
food and proceed to eat it, much to the disgust of
all of the other passengers. And they finally
complained and got the captain down. The captain
came down, listened to their complaints, and then
lined up the two Russians against the wall and told
them that if he should ever hear of this again, he
would personally have them thrown overboard. And
so that ended that particular incident. He came
and landed at Ellis Island, which was at that time
the major disembarkation point for most of the
immigrants. And when I asked him what it is that
they checked on, he said really only two things,
eyes and syphilis. If you could see and a medical
check showed that you didn't have syphilis, that
was it. And so he passed through Ellis Island in
about five minutes, was released, and from that
point on he was on his own. It was literally the new
country. He worked at a variety of jobs.
By the time my mother met him, he had a little store
which sold musical goods. I wouldn't say it was a
terribly successful one, but my father was a
bachelor for a number of years. In fact, he didn't
get married until he was about 40 or 41. And for his
purposes, it was sufficient to keep body and soul
together. And so that was what his business was. My
mother got a hold of him, and she looked at it and
realized that the music business was not the kind
of thing you could depend on to raise a family. And
so she started to introduce furniture. and the
store finally became known as Grove Music and
Furniture Company, which sounds very
prestigious, but in reality was a small
rinky-dink store that catered primarily to the
immigrant groups in downtown Jersey City. The
music portion was the concession my mother had to
make to my father, who still had this great love for
music. He himself played an accordion. Your
mother was already living
them had come from Poland to this country. And so my
mother and my father were married. My mother's
background is quite different. She came from a
little town called Przemysl, which is right on the
P-R-Z-E-M-Y-S-L.
And the last L is really a Polish L, which is an L with
a little diagonal out through it, which gives it a
different accent mark. In reality, the town was
called Shenyava, which is sort of the outskirts of
Kremish. Shenyava would be S-I-E-N-I-A-W-A.
And my mother and her aunt was also, or her sister
was here in this country, still talk about the time
before the First World War, that when winter would
come, And the River Son, which is the river that
separated the Polish border from the Russian
border, would freeze over. S-A-N.
The wolves would come down from the Russian
forests foraging for food, and they would come
into the villages. And it wasn't unusual in those
days to open up the window of the cottage, and by
window it means a shuttered board because there
were no glass panes, and find yourself looking
face to face with a Russian timber wolf. And one of
the stories that comes as a result of that, my wife
happened to write up in a children's magazine, it
was the story about my grandfather played the
fiddle for the wolves. And it literally was true.
My grandfather, like most of the people in that
part of the country, would play some musical
instrument. It was their form of recreation. And
he would play at various wedding feasts. And they
would go from town to town. The town perhaps were
not more than one or two miles apart, or one
kilometer to two kilometers. But the only
transportation you had was your own feet. And this
one winter, my grandfather had played at this one
wedding in this one town and was coming back. And he
played the bull fiddle. And as he was walking in the
snow, he looked up at the ridge and he suddenly
realized there were three or four wolves on that
ridge tracking him. This had been a particularly
bitter, cold winter. And under such
circumstances, the wolves were known to attack
people. Normally, the wolf would try to shy away
from people and attacks on people, per se, were
fairly rare. But nevertheless, people were aware
that under extreme provocation of hunger, a wolf
would come down. And my grandfather realized that
with the heavy clothing he had, there was no chance
to outrun it. And the wolves apparently were there
for some rather gruesome business. They were
looking for food, and he happened to be the prime
source. So he didn't know what to do. And by this
time, the wolves started to come down and circle
him. They got an idea, and he took out the bass
fiddle. And as the wolf came within about 30 to 40
yards of him, he took the bow and strung it across
the fiddle. and then stop the wolves in their track
because they just weren't aware what the sound
could be. But they'd come, stop and come back and
start approaching him again and again. He would
take the bow and draw it against the fiddle and did
this a number of times until we so panicked the
wolves that they ran away. And so from that time on,
he was known as the man who played the fiddle for the
wolves. But my mother stayed on in Poland. Unlike
my father, she didn't leave before the First World
War. She stayed in this little village during the
war itself. And Przemysl was the jumping-off
place in both wars for the German attack on Russia.
And so in this little village, she watched the
Austrian army make its preparations for the
invasion of Russia. The troops were garrisoned in
the town. And in those days, you still had bayonet
chargers and cavalry chargers. And so they met the
Russians. And just outside of the town, there was
some sort of a gory battle scene.
After the battle was over, the dead and the dying
would lie along the field. And in Poland, I would
assume it's a raven. It's a blackbird. It would
come down, being a scavenger bird, and peck. at the
cadavers, but worst of all, would peck at the eyes.
And for a wounded man who couldn't bring his hand up
to defend his face, it would mean that he faced
blindness. And so the Austrian army rounded up all
of the children in the two villages, including my
mother's, gave them long sticks, marched them out
into the battlefield, and had them go along among
the wounded and the dead to beat away these ravens,
lest they peck out the eyes of the living. That had a
very lasting impression on my mother. My mother
from that point on became a pacifist, almost a
militant pacifist. She watched the war and that
was not the end of it because, of course, the
Austrians invaded Russia and did beat the
Germans, and did beat the Russians. The Russians
in turn regrouped, came back and proceeded to take
advantage of the Austrians and in fact had beaten
them. And then I believe it's under Hindenburg,
not even sure if that's him or not. At any rate, the
Prussians came in and of course they now proceeded
to come and beat the Russians again. So you had
three armies marching through this one little
town. First the Austrians, then the Russians, and
then the Russians and the Austrians. In each case
there were battles, in each case there was the gory
mutilation of man. And this left quite an effect on
my mother. She remembers once a, I guess it was an
Austrian captain who was Well, he wasn't kept. He
actually took over, commandeered their home. And
at the supper meal, he brought in food from the
garrison to feed my mother's family and began to
weep and told my mother's family how they reminded
him of his own family and also predicted his own
death, which in fact did occur the following day.
Of course, when peace came, Poland was created.
And my mother did not want to stay in this small
town. She knew she had more abilities than the town
possibly could give her. Yet in those days, it was
difficult for a peasant to get any education. And
so she decided that the only way she could get
gymnasium, which is the same as our schools here,
is to become a nun. And so she joined the nunnery.
and she had a rather idealistic view of the church
at that time thinking that once you got in to a
nunnery that regardless of your state of birth
that if you had ability you would be able to do
things and rise to whatever position you aspire to
and what she found was that again politics existed
even within the church she went there she did go to
school but she also found out that the Daughters of
the wealthy became the teachers. The daughters of
the peasants became the scully maids. And so about
the time it came for her to take a final vow, she
decided that this was no great advantage to her.
And so she left the convent and took off to Warsaw to
become a seamstress.
And she was semi-adopted by a family in Warsaw,
wife of a banker. although she was officially the
seamstress for the woman. The woman, who was
childless, tended to look at my mother as being
sort of a type of daughter. She was treated very
well. And then about this time, the Polish
Revolution takes place. Well, Piłsudski comes
into power. P-I, again, this L, S-U-D-S-K-I.
I think it was Beck. at that time was the president
of Poland. Piłsudski was a socialist, and they,
Piłsudski was accused of high crimes against the
government, but Piłsudski also was a hero of the
newly created state of Poland in that he was able to
stop the Trotskyites at the gates of Warsaw, and so
he had a tremendous allegiance from the army.
Well, Piłsudski was tried by the government for
treason, and he was slated to be shot at 3 o'clock on
a Friday afternoon. The place where he was going to
be executed was not that far from where my mother's
apartment was, or really the banker's wife's
apartment. This was on Alea...
I believe it may be called now Alea Piłsudskiego,
but I'm not quite sure what the original name was.
At any rate, it was one of the fashionable streets
in Warsaw. By 11 o'clock that morning, the train
started to come in from the outskirts, bringing in
the Polish troops, the people who were loyal to
Piłsudski. In other words, a coup d'etat was in the
making. And finally, it erupted into battle. And
part of the battle was fought outside of this
apartment where my mother was living. And she was
able to look down at the square. And the government
trying to stymie the military takeover had thrown
in cadets from the military academy to fight
against the regulars and it was slaughter and she
happened again to witness this bloodbath outside
of her window and again a sort of cynicism came
through again because she watched the priests go
among the wounded and for a pole who almost
invariably is a catholic The communion rites, the
last rites, are extremely, extremely important.
And she said she remembers watching the priest
going among the dying. And in many cases, you
couldn't distinguish who was the soldier from the
field, who was the cadet. Both wore the same
uniforms. And he would say in Polish, ,, which
means left or right. Piłsudski was considered the
leftist. The rightist was the government. And if
you happen to say, , the police would deny you the
last rights. Well, Piłsudski obviously wins. And
the government is overthrown. Piłsudski becomes
the dictator. And it's by this time my mother is so
disillusioned and so disgusted with the
bloodbaths, the social intrigue, that she leaves
for this country. And she said, when she got on the
boat, I forgot where she left from, perhaps . She
said, unlike most of the other people who were
looking back, crying, she just turned her back on
Poland. She said, that was the end. There was
nothing there. She came to this country. She
landed in Jersey City. And she proceeded to work in
a shirt factory. This is part-time work. And
apparently, training that she had received in
Warsaw as a seamstress, was to her advantage
because she stopped to make good money. Well, of
course, she landed again in this downtown Polish
community. This is true of most of the immigrants.
There was a certain comfort in that you knew the
language and the culture, and the people tended to
look after each other. Did your mother learn
English? Yes, in a sense. Her English now, she'll
say, is fairly good, but it's almost not
understandable. Nevertheless, she
communicates very, very well. a combination of
hand gestures, a great deal of screaming, and a
great deal of coquettishness. Her English was
never as good as my father's. My father was fairly
good in English, but so very often when he would use
English, although you would get the content of the
message, you wouldn't get the content of the
meaning because so often when you translate from
another language, you tend to just give the words
rather than to be able to express yourself.
When do you want me to stop? Is there any reason why
your mother and father happened to be in Jersey
City, or was it just happening that way? Well, it
happened that way because remember, Jersey City
is two and a half minutes away from New York City.
And in the New York City, Jersey City, Hoboken
area, this was just an actual residing place for
people who got off the boat. As a six-year-old, did
you have difficulty learning English, or did it
come pretty easy? Do you know I can't even
remember? Because the parochial school I had gone
to was bilingual. I studied Polish history,
American history, Polish grammar, American
grammar, English grammar. So it was completely
bilingual. The nuns who taught were also
bilingual. that I'm aware of, plus the fact that on
the streets you spoke English. In those days, to
have an accent or to speak another language meant
that you were immediately labeled a greenhorn.
And so there was peer pressure to try to get rid of
the vestiges of the other language, the other
culture. And for that reason, many people of my age
who are first generation, whether they're
Polish, Italian, or what have you, tend to have
forgotten their language because the peer
pressure tended to try to make you forget it. At
home, even though your parents would speak in one
language, you would proceed to answer them in
English. Do you speak Polish now on a regular
basis? Yes, every time I speak with my mother. Plus
the fact that I've tried to keep up with it at any
chance that I'd have, I tried to practice with it.
Let me get your idea on how you as a young boy were
affected by the Depression, also how your family
was affected. I think, physically, I wasn't
affected in the sense that I was not hungry and I was
not without clothes. Of course, I was born in 1930,
which means at the peak of the Depression, this is
my growing up period of time. I always had food when
I wanted it, and I had clothes when I wanted it. It
wasn't by any means the best of clothes or anything
of this sort. But again, if you're born into it, and
everybody else is in the same circumstance,
you're not aware that you're either
discriminated or you're poverty-stricken. And
this was probably true also of the culture. I'm
sure by present standards now we would say we were
culturally deprived, but no one realized it. You
know, this was the normal state of being. Our
recreational area were the streets of the city and
the docks of Jersey City. And in many ways, they
were far more exciting than anything anyone could
ever construct now. The general rule of play was
you left the house at 8 o'clock in the morning, and
you went out and played with your playmates or did
whatever you want, and you came back at 10 o'clock
at night. The only rule was that don't have the
policeman bring you home, which meant that you
learned to cope with life individually, by
yourself, at a much earlier age. than perhaps,
say, a child growing up in a suburban area. You got
your knocks, you came back with your cuts, you got
into your tussles with your peer groups and alien
peer groups, but you learned to accommodate very
quickly. You developed your own game, stickball,
which is uniquely a city game. It's a thing that
developed in people trying to have recreation
within close confines. We played football of a
type that nobody here has ever seen because nobody
could afford a football. In fact, I didn't see a
football, a real football, until I was about 15
years old. A football was a bunch of newspapers
wrapped around tight with an elastic band around
it. And I was a superb passer with one of those until
they gave me a real football and I found I couldn't
handle the thing. What about brothers and
sisters? I have none.
Would you say again how you got to Rensselaer Tech?
Rensselaer Polytech? By the time I was about a
junior in high school, I knew what I wanted. I
wanted to become an engineer for a number of
reasons. For one thing, engineering didn't
require the background of the so-called cultural
topics. literature, great literature that you
normally think of as a child having at home was not
available in our house or anybody else's homes.
Yet I had an ability with mathematics and I loved
abstractions. And about this time I decided I
wanted to go into an engineering college and so I
looked around and the traditional schools in that
area would have been Rutgers, NYU, New York
University, CCNY, although that was not
available to me. That was only available for New
York City residents, Brooklyn Polytech, and of
course I'd heard about Rensselaer, didn't know
much about it. I did want one thing, I wanted to get
away from home. I just felt, you know, the confines
of Jersey City were beginning to get to me. I wanted
to get away from that area. There wasn't that much
there, plus the fact that I watched the poverty,
which I began now to perceive, And I wanted to break
out of the mold of Jersey City. The normal mold for
me, or for most of the people in the downtown area,
would have been to finish high school, for those
who were fortunate, most often not quit at 16, and
go to work on the docks, or go to work in the railroad
yard, or go to work in the slaughterhouses. And it
was like a great pit staring in front of me, and I
wanted to avoid it as much as possible. And you
can't appreciate what it means until you've been
there. It's like a nightmare, a constant
recurring nightmare, somebody saying, well,
you're doing good, but wait, we're going to get
you. You're coming back. And I didn't know this. I
did not want that kind of an existence. It's as
though somebody were just chasing after me, and I
just had to run and run and run and do everything I
could to get away from it. And Rensselaer seemed to
have been the furthest away of all the schools that
I was aware of when I applied. not hoping or didn't
even think that they might take me, but I thought
nothing could be lost by applying, and when I
applied, lo and behold, they accepted me. For what
reasons, I have no idea. Do you remember how the
ward bosses affected the lives of the
newly-aroused immigrants? Oh, yeah. The
greatest system that we've ever had, in spite of
what you hear about. You know, we talk now about
modern society being uncommunicative and modern
leaders being removed from society. Hague's
machine, and for that matter the machines in all of
the cities, were as corrupt as they can be in that
people did take money, but they never took money
away from the mouths of the people, especially
from the poor. And the ward, of course, existed not
because of the wealthy or the middle class. It
existed because the immigrants or the poor. Once
you established yourself as a Democrat, because
there were no Republicans in Jersey City, at least
I never was aware of any, you never had to worry
about food. If you were in dire need, in
starvation, the ward boss would be the one who
would take care of you. He would make sure that
either companies or perhaps the city would
provide food for you. Where there was a
possibility of a job, even though it was makeshift
work, you'd have some money coming in. And it was a
very humane type of existence. That is, they
literally looked after their own because the ward
bosses themselves were nothing more than just
part of the people. And the ward boss lived right
there among the people. He was one of you. He
probably lived three or four more houses down in a
cold water flat, which is where most of us lived.
And so if you had a problem, you went to him, and he
knew exactly what it was that you were talking
about. He, in turn, would have the influence then
into City Hall. And City Hall depended on its votes
from the poor. Now, the bad part about it is, if you
happen to be a free spirit and suddenly started to
mouth off and said, I'm going to clean up the
government, or I hereby claim myself as a
Republican, or some other nonsensical thing that
a luxury that is really limited to the middle
class, you found yourself on a very brutal end of
the stick. Because as charitable as they could be,
they would not brook any rebellion. They would
come down on you pretty hard. And by that I mean
physically. The cops would visit you and proceed
to work you over. And it wasn't unusual for people
to disappear. But by and large, most people didn't
do that. Most people weren't. Most people, the
politics part, was the last thing away from their
mind. The important thing was survival and how to
keep the family together. This continued through
the 30s? This continued right into the 40s, and in
fact, the last vestige of it was Mayor Daley. Mayor
Daley was the last of the great city bosses. He
lived right among the people. He understood the
people. The problem was that he may have stayed on
perhaps one generation too late because once the
first generation grew up, second-generation
started to move outside of the city. It started now
to expand. After the Second World War, suburbs
started to come into being. The working man became
a middle-class citizen and could afford things,
which meant the concentration of people
diminished. And when that happened, at least that
would have been one of the reasons that caused the
demise of the city force. But if you were to ask, how
do I judge it? Was it a successful political
system? I would say superbly. It satisfied the
demands and the needs of the people at the time they
most needed it. And during the Depression, it was a
particularly good system. In downtown Jersey
City, people would have starved had it not been for
the ward bosses and for the pressure that they
would put on the industries in the city. Then you
think the ward bosses had more of an effect on
stabilizing the Jersey City area than did the New
Deal programs? Well, yes, I do. The New Deal
program was an overview program. The New Deal
program would have meant nothing at all to anybody
unless it was implemented. The ward bosses
perhaps were the most important single item. The
New Deal helped give the whole country a different
direction. But if the New Deal had not come in, say
Roosevelt had not won, The people in the cities
would have still survived because you still had
your big city bosses and you still had your ward
system. And your ward system did exist during
Republican as well as Democratic
administrations. It would have been a little bit
harder, but it would have still continued on. What
the New Deal did is, of course, create WPA. And WPA
in turn was administered through the city and
finally ultimately dispensed by the ward bosses.
So in my view, the ward system was perhaps the
single most important stabilizing element for
the immigrants in this country. Do you have any
indication how politics of Jersey City has
changed since you were there in the 30s as a boy?
Yeah. For one thing, you have now two new ethnic
groups. You have the Puerto Ricans and you have the
Negroes. The downtown area is almost totally
replaced by those. There are a few small pockets of
either Polish or Italian ethnic areas. But it's
changed. A number of things have come into being.
For one thing, at least for the whites, there's a
middle class basis which didn't exist in the 30s.
The cohesiveness of the people perhaps has also
changed now than it was in the 30s and in the 40s.
When you didn't have transportation, mass
transportation, when you didn't have all of the
possibilities for recreation, people tended to
live in their own immediate environments. The
streets and the city block was not only a place to
sleep or walk, it was also a place to play, it was a
place of culture. And you had a whole cultural
dimension known as the inner city block. which in
many cases still exists now, but it exists among
the Negroes and the Puerto Ricans. And to really
see it would mean that you would have to go there and
understand it. Now within the, say, the Negro
community, you find a great deal of violence
associated with it. Violence in the sense of guns
and knives and things of this sort. There was
violence in the sense that there would be an
occasional fight, fist fight, and at worst a pool
cue. but I cannot remember violence of the nature
that you see here. And of course, many
sociologists have said that it's because of the
background of the people, the cultural
background of the people. I'm not sure I buy that,
quite frankly, because again, when you talk with a
peasant, you're not talking with an aristocratic
individual who could look back at family. But in
contrast to the minority now, the elements that
you see now, with the exception of the Spanish,
There was a cohesiveness of family, which the
Negro is now just beginning to establish. So I'm
not quite sure how you'd put that in perspective.
There are differences. Now, Jersey City is
different now. Has there been any change in the
second generation of immigrants? Has there been
any movement away from the Democratic Party by
that group compared to their fathers and mothers?
Yeah, there has been. As you get into the middle
class syndrome, you find that you begin objecting
to the amount of money taken out of your paycheck.
You suddenly begin enjoying the luxuries of life,
and you begin objecting to have to share them. And
you find that you more and more tend to lean toward a
Republican view, which means keep government off
my back, rather than a Democratic one, which is
basically get government in because it's a great
help. So there has been that movement. Now, how
much, I don't know. Tell us about your years at
Rensselaer. There's not really much to say. You
entered in what, 1941? I'm 48. I graduated in 52. I
was a very serious student and very much aware that
in my family this was the first time that anybody
has ever gone through high school, let alone go to
college. And I was aware of both the
responsibility as well as the fears My father was
able to scrape enough money to put me through. The
tuition at that time was $750 a year, which was a
considerable amount of money. And so I tried to
minimize costs. My clothes were all Army surplus.
This was the post-war years where you could get
fairly nice surplus clothes. The officer pink
twills was the standard sports costume for most
people on campuses in those days. Would you say
that again? Pink twills. Spell that. P-I-N-K.
T-W-I-L-L-S. Two words. Yeah, they're twills.
They were gabardine trousers that officers would
wear and that were sold in a surplus equipment. You
got surplus jackets, surplus shirts, and so I
lived that way. My food was very sparse. In fact, I
think I lived on beans most of the time. I never went
out on Saturday and Sunday. I was what you'd call a
drudge. I worked and studied seven days a week and
enjoyed it. For me, it was as though I entered into a
new land, and there was just a tremendous sense of
excitement, of learning. And so I spent four years
without really having much of a social life, other
than working and working and working away. But I
graduated with honors, and I never regret those
four years. They were not what you'd call a
traditional high school or college experience,
because I didn't go out on dates, didn't go out to
fraternities, even though they did exist. I had
very few friends, pretty much people the same as I.
And most of all, enjoyed what I was doing, enjoyed
just studying, enjoyed just expanding my mind and
standing in awe of the opportunity that was given
to me. Okay, what happened in 52 when you
completed? Well, then I graduated and I went to
Curtis Wright Corporation. I worked in the...
Okay, in St. Louis? No, Caldwell, New Jersey.
Caldwell, New Jersey. Yeah, they had a propeller
division there. And I worked there for two years.
And, of course, this was now getting on toward the
tail end of the Korean War. And I remember I
reported to the draft board, and they said, well,
you're working for an essential industry. I said,
fine. And then they came around and they drafted
me, and that's perhaps not quite true. In reality,
about 54, I went to the draft board, and I said, will
you draft me? They said, yes, whether you want to
go. I told them, well, how about spring? It seems a
nice time. I worked at Curtis Wright. And of
course, Curtis Wright was a great employer of
Rensselaer students. And many of the people
working in this small office, the same as the
machine design office, were people that had
preceded me by a year or so. And I knew were honor
students of themselves. And I watched what they
were doing. And what struck me is that here were
people highly motivated in college, very
capable, who did nothing more than live for the
weekend. They would talk about what they did last
weekend. They would talk about what they were
going to do the following weekend. Would come in at
8 o'clock and would leave promptly at 5 o'clock.
And that was not what, in my mind, I had studied for.
I didn't want an 8 to 5 job. It had to be more than
that. It had to be a consuming passion. Perhaps at
that age I still thought of those terms. Perhaps I
still do. I began to become very disillusioned
with the practice of engineering as I had seen it at
Curtis Wright, and I decided I need to get away and
see, is this really what I want to do? And so when I
asked them to draft me, it was, in a sense, my escape
route. It was a legitimate way of leaving, doing
something that I would never again do in my life,
playing soldier, but most of all, giving me the
time to think what I wanted to do. And so I was
drafted. On May the 3rd, 1954, I went to Fort Dix,
did my basic, then I went to Fort Huachuca, and then
finally to Gila Bend. Spell it, Fort Huachuca.
H-U-A-C-H-U-K-A. My father never could
pronounce it. He always called it Fort Hoochie
Coochie. Located in where? It's located in
Arizona, south. In fact, I think it's a town of its
own now. It's located around, well, south of
Tombstone. and I'd leave west of Douglas. How long
were you in the Army? Two years. You spent the whole
time in Arizona? Yeah. In 1956 you got out. What did
you do then? I went to graduate school at Ohio
State. The original idea was... Columbus? I got
out a little earlier. I got out, I think, 60 days
earlier than two years because the Army at that
time had a policy that you could get out up to ninety
days early if you could show that a school had begun
within that period of time or you had seasonal
occupation. And after two years at Gila Bend I
decided it's time now to leave. I got my act pretty
much together. I know what I want to do. And I
started to look at graduate schools and somebody
mentioned Ohio State and Ohio State was under a
quarter system which meant that they started
their semester on March the 16th. So I applied for
early leave, was granted it, and went to Columbus,
Ohio, and did my master's. Having done my
master's, finished it, I was offered an
instructorship and asked to continue on for my
doctorate. When did you complete the master's? In
19, let's see, I got out at 56, 57. And then you
worked at Ohio State? Right, as an instructor. I
worked on my doctorate at the same time. When did
you complete the doctorate? 62. You stayed there
through that time? Yeah. At Ohio State? Yeah, from
57 to 62. When did you marry? I married in 58. Where
was your wife from? She was originally from
Ridgeway, but she was a graduate student.
Ridgeway where? Pennsylvania. She was a graduate
student pursuing doctoral studies at Ohio State
in the Department of History. In fact, when I was
finishing up my master's, she had just finished
her prelims for her PhD. We met and we married in
1958, a year after we met, about a year and a half
after we met. My wife was working on a
dissertation. And after we married, she decided
that no, Really, the dissertation was not what she
was interested in. For one thing, it was a rather
boring subject. As she now freely admits, had the
subject been more exciting, she probably would
have continued. But instead, since she did have a
teaching certificate, she then went and taught in
the public schools in Columbus, also taught at
Ohio Wesleyan University, which is close to
Columbus, and then worked as a secretary
part-time jobs.
Could you tell us why you chose mechanical
engineering rather than another field of
engineering? Well, I didn't choose mechanical
engineering. My bachelor's was in aeronautical
engineering, and my master's and my doctorate
were in flight mechanics. Those were the areas
that I enjoyed. When I came to A&M, there was no
flight mechanics department. There was a program
called M&M, Mechanics and Materials, or at that
time SM, Structural Mechanics. And I came to the
Mechanical Engineering Department because it
was the closest thing to my interest. In 1962, you
completed your doctorate. What did you do then? I
stayed on at Ohio State for that year as an
assistant professor. I was tenured, still in
applied mechanics, where I did, in fact, the same
department I did my graduate work in. I was tenured
by that time because the rank of instructor, which
I held for five years, was a tenure-track
position. And after four years, you were granted
tenure. So I had tenure and an assistant
professorship. But I decided that staying on at
the institution where you got your degree was not
the best policy. And so we then proceeded to look at
universities throughout the country. And like
most people, sent out something like 75 letters
and received a number of responses. And A&M was one
of them. And we looked at what A&M had, what it
offered, and I decided I wanted to come to A&M. So
you came here in 63? 63, right. You've been here
ever since. Right. As a professor, I came in as an
associate professor. I became a full professor in
67 and continued on. And you've been involved in
teaching and research. Right. You haven't held
administrative posts? No.
Did you find that when you came to Texas A&M that you
were discriminated against by your northern
background? No, I got the usual jokes. And in fact,
the very first one that I came In fact, the first
year we came, they had two snows at College
Station. And I remember they were telling me about
a Blue Northern. I had never heard of this before.
And finally, this was in about September. It was an
unusually hot September, October. And when the
Blue Northern came, it dropped the temperature
from about 95 to about 89. And everybody said, now
isn't it cool? And I looked at him, and I told him,
the only other Blue Northern that you've ever seen
was Grant. And he came marching in from Georgia.
But I never had any problems because of the
Northern background or the accent. What are some
of the research projects that you've been
involved in in the 18 years that you've been here?
Well, there were the NASA projects and this was, at
that time, the Manned Spacecraft Center, which is
now Johnson Spacecraft Center. In the 60s, shell
structures, which was the outer skin, was a
critical element. And at that time, they were
still trying to develop techniques by which to
analyze these type of structures and assure
against any failure. And so from about 63 to about
71, I was directly working with the Manned
Spacecraft Center, funded by them, to do work,
both theoretical and practical, on developing
ways of analyzing reinforced shell structures.
About 69, the project Themis came into being. This
was the idea of helping schools, just building
research programs, develop competence. And this
was funded by the Department of Defense. And A&M
was one of the recipients of one of these grants.
And I defined for them a program in the College of
Engineering dealing with the optimization of
reinforced shells. And that is, if you're going to
reinforce it and put stiffeners, what is the most
efficient way of doing it so you gain your strength
at a minimum increase in weight? And that program
then brought in industry.
China, not Charles Ford, but up in the Fort Worth
area, there's Charles Ford and there's Convair.
General Dynamics, rather. The General Dynamics
people were extremely interested in it because in
that time they were developing the composites
program. The composite being just now a material
that is coming into its own, but in those days it was
a very exotic type of material, very high cost, but
the Air Force was extremely interested in it
because it gave stiffness properties, strength
properties, and very, very little weight. And it
also had another feature that is now beginning to
be mentioned, and that is it was invisible to
radar. And so we brought them into the project
because, again, composites were a means of
reinforcing shells. That monies ended about
1971, about the time Nixon cut back all type of
funding. And so for a period of time, from about 71
to 74, I did various things, research, again
within shells,